What do you say to voters who feel they are worse off under your presidency than they were under President Trump?
How will you ensure that a 10% tariff on all goods coming into the U.S. does not drive prices even higher?
Why should corporations pay even less in taxes than they do now, given the U.S. facing trillion-dollar deficits and record debt?
What additional leverage will you use to get Hamas and Israel to end the war?
What do you say to Black voters who are disappointed that you have not made more progress on issues like Black unemployment, maternal mortality, and incarceration rates?
How do you address concerns about your capability to handle the toughest job in the world well into your 80s?
Will you name one specific step you are willing to take to keep Social Security solvent?
What would you do to make childcare more affordable?
Do you believe the tens of millions of Americans who intend to vote for Donald Trump will be intending to vote against democracy?
Will you pledge tonight that once all legal challenges have been exhausted, you will accept the results of this election regardless of who wins?
Will you say right now that political violence in any form is unacceptable?
Do you support any legal limits on how late a woman should be able to obtain an abortion?
Why should voters trust you to solve the crisis at the border, given the record number of migrants who have illegally crossed the border on your watch?
Does your plan to carry out the largest deportation operation in American history mean you will deport every undocumented immigrant in America, including those who have jobs, spouses who are citizens, and those who have lived here for decades? If so, how will you do it?
Are Vladimir Putin's terms for ending the war in Ukraine acceptable to you?
Would you support the creation of an independent Palestinian state to support peace in the region?
Will you take any action as president to slow the climate crisis?
Will you name one specific step you are willing to take to keep Social Security solvent?
What will you do for those in the throes of addiction to get the treatment they need?