Title: Interview with Joe Scarborough of MSNBC in Ballina, Ireland
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/interview-with-joe-scarborough-msnbc-ballina-ireland

SCARBOROUGH: You went to the hospice center that was dedicated to Beau. I'm wondering, what did that mean to you, to go back and be there?

THE PRESIDENT: Well, you know, Beau and Hunter and I talked about -- after I stopped being Vice President, about -- excuse me, before I became Vice President -- about, we're going to go to Ireland one day. And I always, I always wanted Beau to -- to be there. And we started off at the shrine down at Knock, at the Blessed Mother, and we're with the priest showing us around, and he said, by the way, the priest who gave the military chaplain, who gave your son last rites, which is the Catholic version of -- is, is here somewhere.

And sure enough, about 15 minutes later, the priest shows up, who Hunter Biden had spent probably a number of days with, because he'd bring the priest in to talk to Beau, and he showed up, and he reminded us of talking to Beau, and how proud he was of Beau, and it just -- I know it sounds stupid, I should probably hesitate to say it, but I felt like Beau was with me, and it just felt like it completed the circle, too. I know that sounds stupid, maybe, but it just -- I felt like my sister, Valerie and my son Hunter -- we just felt like Beau is with us.

[The second segment was released as part of the first "Joe Scarborough Presents" on April 24, 2023.]

SCARBOROUGH: You said, actually in your speech, you said a lot of American investment right now is on the sidelines, and they're waiting to come into Northern Ireland.

THE PRESIDENT: There is, there is, because they're just they want to make sure this doesn't end up not being put together. Look, it's one -- the way to end up having a democracy that functions, it usually functions as a consequence of institutional structures, and when that occurs, you can generate economic income. And when there's economic growth, everything works better.