Title: Interview with Jonathan "Bushman" Dunnings on His Radio Show
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/interview-with-jonathan-bushman-dunnings-his-radio-show

THE PRESIDENT: Hey, Bush. Bush, this is Joe Biden. How you doing, man?

DUNNINGS: I'm doing good this afternoon, Mr. President. How are you doing?

THE PRESIDENT: I'm doing fine. I understand it was 29 years since you went in there. When did you start, when you were 10?

DUNNINGS: Yeah. Let's just say I started when I was 10, yes.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, I got elected to the Senate when I was 29. I was only 15. So, I get it.

DUNNINGS: OK. We'll make sure to put that on Wikipedia.

THE PRESIDENT: OK. Fire away, man. Thanks for having me.

DUNNINGS: Hey. Well, thanks for reaching out. I appreciate it. I know this year is going to be a big year. This election is going to be huge, historical. What is at stake for our Michigander voters this election?

THE PRESIDENT: Well, I really think, Bush -- I think what's at stake is -- is literally our democracy, not a joke. I mean, this is a guy who, if you read or watch the things he says, is -- he is not a Democrat with a -- with a big D or a small D. And, I mean -- this guy says he's going to [inaudible] all the folks who killed those cops and -- and invaded the United States Congress, that they were patriots. And he wants to -- he's going to make sure, if he gets elected, he's going to make sure he frees them all. He talks about how he may -- he's going to have to excise parts of the constitution. I mean, this guy says things, and he means it, you know? And he said them at first in 2020, I wasn't sure he was as radical as he is. But I think a lot is at stake. And I think the living -- look, just as we've come to office, Bush, we've gotten a situation where we've improved the economy for all Americans, particularly Black Americans, significantly. And we have the most advanced economy in the world now. We've got a lot more work to do, don't get me wrong. But, you know, I think it's a -- but the threat to our democracy, our constitution, is really at stake. Trump's presidency would mean a return to chaos, division, violence, MAGA extremism. And this is the once-in-a-generation moment to stand up and save democracy and defend our rights. But it's going to take all of us. And Michigan played an important role in rejecting the MAGA extremists in 2020, putting us on a path to progress. And the primary is another opportunity to make your voice heard. So, I just want to make one thing clear. Polls open at 7:00 on Tuesday, close at 8:00. And -- and you go to iwillvote.com to find out your polling place. Make your voice heard, please.

DUNNINGS: You know, a lot of people have been told or have the mindset that their voice doesn't count. What can you say to those people to reassure them that their vote is just as important as the next person?

THE PRESIDENT: Their vote is not as -- just as important. In a sense, it's more important. And the reason I say that is because, look, I got started in politics as a 29-year-old kid. Before that, in the civil rights movement. My -- my state was segregated by law. And I got involved as a kid in high school and desegregating anyway. So, it's -- we've come a long way. We've got a hell of a lot further to go, but we're making enormous, enormous progress. For example, if you think about it, you have a situation where we've been able to increase the, you know, the lowest unemployment rate in the history of America for African-Americans. We're in a situation where the -- we created 1.5 million new jobs, but 2.8 million are Black voters. Black wealth is up 60% since the pandemic. Black businesses started up at a faster rate than any time in 30 years. And Black families have health care coverage under the ACA more than ever before. Cut Black child poverty in half in three years. Black homeownership is up. We've invested 7 billion -- I come out of a -- I come out of HBCU background, and we've been --I've been able to invest $7 billion in HBCUs because they don't have the endowments to build the laboratories and backgrounds to train the workers for the high-paying jobs. Well, we invested $7 billion in HBCUs. We canceled -- we canceled $138 billion in student loans, and the Black borrowers borrowed more. And 3.9 million borrowers got their debt wiped out. We've increased -- just increased education opportunities. Pell grants, we've increased by 900 bucks, affecting 60% of the Black undergraduates. I could go on and on, but there's overwhelming reason why the -- and it's understandable why they don't know because a lot of this stuff took -- I worked like hell to pass the last three years. And it's all just kicking, you know, into play right now. And -- but I'm sorry. I'm talking too long, but I --

DUNNINGS: Listen --

THE PRESIDENT: I feel -- I feel really strongly about this, man. I really, really do. When I got elected -- I'd just say it. I promised if I got elected, I'd have an administration that looked like America. I have more African-Americans in positions of authority in my -- from the vice president to cabinet members. I've appointed more circuit courts of appeal judges or women than every other president in the history of the United States of America. You know, I just think it's important because what people are beginning to see is there's not a damn thing which I've known my whole life, the way I was raised, not a damn thing an African-American can't do that aybody else can do. They're just not given the shot. Everybody deserves a shot. And everybody -- my dad used to have an expression. He said, "Joey, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck. It's about your dignity. It's about respect. It's about being treated well. It's about being given an even shot." And that's what it's all about. And that's what we're doing. And guess what? [inaudible] stepping up, man. Stepping up big time.

DUNNINGS: You know, with all your accomplishments, Mr. President, I mean, you can easily retire after this term. So, why are you running for reelection?

THE PRESIDENT: Donald Trump. I know I can beat him, and I know he must be beaten. Think about it. All kidding aside, it's not a joke. Imagine if he gets reelected. He's committed to wipe out everything that we've done. Not -- and not generically, specifically wants to do away with the Affordable Care Act, which provides an incredible help for folks who, in fact, have preexisting conditions. He says he wants to do away with the cap I put on the ability of the Medicare to negotiate prices for drugs. How many people you know or I know will help a lot of people growing up who, in fact, and now who need insulin? Well, they're having to pay 400 bucks a month for these prescription drugs. Well, now, they only have to pay 35 bucks a month if you got a law passed saying Medicare could, in fact, negotiate those prices with the drug industry. And, by the way, you know what that does? That saves -- that saves the taxpayer $160 billion. Because instead of paying out -- it's not just on prescription, that prescription, but it's about -- for example, beginning at the end of this year, any senior receiving -- has a bill that exceeds -- a total bill exceeding $2,000 doesn't have to pay it because Medicare is going to take care of it because you can't -- and that's a big deal because some drugs are $14,000, $15,000 a year for cancer. And, you know, it's just about tax fairness. I mean, look, we're able to -- he wants to cut Social Security. He wants to cut Medicare. I mean, we got to stop it. I mean -- and these affect not only African-Americans, but primarily African-Americans and middle class and poor white folks, as well as Hispanics and Asians and others, minorities. And -- we just need -- we have to take him on.

DUNNINGS: Well, I appreciate your honesty and your candor, Mr. President. And I know you have a busy schedule today, and I just appreciate you taking time to reach out to Bush here in Michigan. And sharing your thoughts on this year's election.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, Bushman, thank you for what you're doing, making -- look, the biggest thing is getting information to people. And with the way things work these days, it's awful hard to get that information out. And there's so many lies going out on the Internet, so many lies going out that it's hard to cut through. But with guys like you, Bushman, you -- you -- you've been straight up, and you've had a major impact on the community. And just remember, you know, go out and go to iwillvote.com to figure where you're going to vote because we need you. The country needs you. I really mean it. Don't let them talk you out of it.

DUNNINGS: Absolutely not. We'll make sure we do that. And I'll keep spreading the word. Thank you, Mr. President.

THE PRESIDENT: I look forward to personally meeting you, pal, if you're willing.

DUNNINGS: Yes, yes. God willing, we will make that happen one day. Hopefully soon.

THE PRESIDENT: OK. Thank you, pal.

DUNNINGS: Thank you.