Title: Letter to Congressional Leaders on Terminating the Designation of the Central African Republic, Gabon, Niger, and Uganda as Beneficiary Sub-Saharan African Countries Under the African Growth and Oppor
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/letter-congressional-leaders-terminating-the-designation-the-central-african-republic

Letter to Congressional Leaders on Terminating the Designation of the Central African Republic, Gabon, Niger, and Uganda as Beneficiary Sub-Saharan African Countries Under the African Growth and Opportunity Act

Dear Mr. Speaker: (Dear Madam President:)

In accordance with section 506A(a)(3)(B) of the Trade Act of 1974, as amended (19 U.S.C. 2466a(a)(3)(B)), I am providing advance notification of my intent to terminate the designation of the Central African Republic, the Gabonese Republic (Gabon), Niger, and the Republic of Uganda (Uganda) as beneficiary sub-Saharan African countries under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA).

I am taking this step because I have determined that the Central African Republic, Gabon, Niger, and Uganda do not meet the eligibility requirements of section 104 of the AGOA. Specifically, the Government of the Central African Republic has engaged in gross violations of internationally recognized human rights and has not established, or is not making continual progress toward establishing, the protection of internationally recognized worker rights, the rule of law, and political pluralism. Niger and the Government of Gabon have not established, or are not making continual progress toward establishing, the protection of political pluralism and the rule of law. Finally, the Government of Uganda has engaged in gross violations of internationally recognized human rights.

Despite intensive engagement between the United States and the Central African Republic, Gabon, Niger, and Uganda, these countries have failed to address United States concerns about their non-compliance with the AGOA eligibility criteria.

Accordingly, I intend to terminate the designation of these countries as beneficiary sub-Saharan African countries under the AGOA, effective January 1, 2024. I will continue to assess whether the Central African Republic, Gabon, Niger, and Uganda meet the AGOA eligibility requirements.

Sincerely,



JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR.