Title: Remarks in an Exchange With Reporters in Hagerstown, Maryland
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/remarks-exchange-with-reporters-hagerstown-maryland

Remarks in an Exchange With Reporters in Hagerstown, Maryland

Israel-Hamas Conflict in Gaza, Palestinian Territories

Q. Mr. President, how close are we to the cease-fire?

The President. It's in the hands of Hamas right now. The Israelis have been cooperating. There's an offer out there that's rational. We don't know what we're—we'll know in a couple days if it's going to happen. But we need the cease-fire.

Q. How close are we——

Hostages Held by Hamas

Q. [Inaudible]—to the hostage deal?

The President. I was just saying that. The hostage deal is in the hands of Hamas right now——

Q. Okay.

The President. ——because there's been an offer, a rational offer. The Israelis have agreed to it and—waiting to see what the—Hamas does.

Israel-Hamas Conflict in Gaza, Palestinian Territories

Q. Do you think there will be a deal by Ramadan?

The President. Well, I—there's got to be a cease-fire because Ramadan—if we get into a circumstance where this continues through Ramadan, Israel and Jerusalem—[inaudible]—it could be very, very dangerous. So we're looking—we're trying hard for that cease-fire.

2024 Presidential Election

Q. Mr. President, what's your message to Democrats who are concerned about your poll numbers?

The President. My poll numbers—the last five polls, you guys don't report, I'm winning. Five—five in a row. You guys only look at the New York Times. They're a great paper.

Israel-U.S. Relations/Humanitarian Assistance to Gaza

Q. Can you get the Israelis to allow more aid into Gaza?

The President. Pardon me?

Q. The Israelis, can you—are you pressuring them to get more aid into Gaza?

The President. I'm working with them very hard. We're going to get more—we must get more aid into Gaza. There's no excuses. None.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel

Q. And how is your relationship Netanyahu these days?

The President. Like it's always been.

Q. Sir?

The President. Like it's always been.

The President's State of the Union Address

Q. Mr. President, what are you preparing for your State of the Union Address?

The President. You'll hear me on Thursday. [Laughter]

All right. Thank you all so very much.

Q. [Inaudible]—Super Tuesday?