Title: Remarks Prior to a Meeting With President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo of Indonesia
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/remarks-prior-meeting-with-president-joko-jokowi-widodo-indonesia

President Biden. Mr. President, welcome. Welcome to the White House.

We've spent a lot of time together over the last several years, and it's really wonderful that you're here. I'm grateful for the hospitality you showed me in Bali, and we're delighted to have you here.

Today we're talking about taking our relationship to launching the highest possible level of cooperation: a comprehensive strategic partnership.

This will mark a new era between our—in the relationships between the United States and—and Indonesia across the board, affecting everything. It includes enhancing security cooperation, particularly maritime security. And it includes expanding our work together to build a secure and resilient supply chain. It includes deepening our collaboration to combat the climate crisis.

You know, I've told you this before, but Indonesia is a critical player—critical in the clean energy transition world.

And we're also going to continue to work with ASEAN to advance a free, open, secure, and prosperous Indo-Pacific. And I want to thank you—and I mean this sincerely—I want to thank you for your leadership on ASEAN this year. I really do.

As we mark nearly 75 years of cooperation between our nations, I'm of the view our partnership is stronger than it's ever been and is going to even get stronger. I'm looking forward to our conversation today and to our cooperation with APEC summit in San Francisco later this week.

As we say—used to say in the place that I worked a long time, the United States Senate, I yield the floor to my friend.

President Widodo. It is an honor for me to fulfill the invitation from President Biden to visit Washington, DC.

The U.S. is one of the most important partners for Indonesia. And we agreed to elevate our partnership into comprehensive strategic partnership. But most importantly, we have to give a real meaning to it.

For Indonesia, economic cooperation is priority, including on supply chains issues.

Indonesia also wishes our partnership contribute to regional and global peace and prosperity. So Indonesia appeals to the U.S. to do more to stop the atrocities in Gaza. Cease-fire is a must for the sake of humanity.

Once again, thank you for your invitation, President Biden. Thank you.

President Biden. Thank you.

And as we met outside as you got out of your automobile, we had a very important discussion on climate. The President said, "I'm cold." [Laughter] I told him I could take care of that immediately. [Laughter]

Welcome.

President Widodo. Thank you, President Biden.

President Biden. Thank you all so much.

President Widodo. Thank you. Thank you.