Title: Remarks Prior to a Meeting With Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/remarks-prior-meeting-with-chancellor-olaf-scholz-germany-1

President Biden. Well, welcome back, Olaf. Thank you very much for making the effort to be here.

And you know, it was about 2 years ago, you and I met here, and you said the United States and Germany have to act together and do what's necessary together. And we've been doing that. We've got to continue to do it.

And you know, Congress—we have to pass a national security spending package now. Our House Members are being somewhat reluctant—and hopefully, it's more politics than real, but—including funding for Ukraine and to help them continue to be able to defend themselves against the brutal aggression of Russia.

But I want to thank you, Olaf, for your leadership from the very beginning. And you've done something no one thought could get done: You've doubled Germany's military aid to Ukraine this year. And it's really important. We've got to step up and do our part now.

Today we'll also discuss the work to—just that we're going to be doing together to strengthen NATO ahead of the 75th NATO summit this summer here. So you've got to come back.

And also, the latest developments in the Middle East, including hostage release—we have negotiations going on; increase in lifesaving humanitarian assistance to civilians in Gaza—in the Gaza Strip; and preserve the space for an enduring peace for a two-state solution down the road. I think it's possible. It's going to take a lot of work, but I think we can do it.

So, Olaf, thank you very, very much for being here. We've got a lot to talk about.

And the floor is yours, man.

Chancellor Scholz. Yes, thank you for having me and for having the chance to continue our conversations we have continuously all the time.

And yes, Germany and the United States have to play a role to keep peace in the world. This is especially so looking at the Russian aggression against Ukraine, which is still ongoing. And when we saw this ridiculous interview Putin gave shortly, we understand that he is always telling a lot of lies about the history of this war, because it's so easy to understand why he's doing it. He wants to get the part of the territory of its neighbors.

Just imperialist—imperialism. And I think it is necessary that we do all our best to support Ukraine and to give them the chance to defend their country. And so I'm very happy that in Europe we've made, now, decisions to give the necessary financial support to the budget, also that Germany was ready to increase its support with weapon delivery.

And hopefully, the——

[At this point, President Biden crossed his fingers.]

——Congress will—the House will follow you and make a decision on giving the necessary support, because without the support of United States and without the support of the European states, Ukraine will have not a chance to defend its own country.

I really think that it's very good that we are working together looking at the situation in the Middle East and especially working on the two-state solution, which is necessary for a lasting peace. And I'm sure that the United States and Germany are aligned intensely.

President Biden. We are. We are.

But I—especially want to—I'd like to add another point: The failure of the United States Congress, if it occurs, not to support Ukraine is close to criminal neglect. It is outrageous.

Kissinger was right when he said: Not since Napoleon has Europe not looked over its shoulder and worried about Russia—until now.

You and I helped put NATO together in a way it hadn't been a long time. So much is at stake, so they'd better step up.

Thank you all very much.

[Several reporters began asking questions at once.]

Q. Was the report politically motivated, Mr. President?

President Biden. [Inaudible]

Q. Was the report politically motivated, Mr. President? Mr. President—was the report politically motivated, Mr. President?