Title: Statement on the 25th Anniversary of the Shooting at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/statement-the-25th-anniversary-the-shooting-columbine-high-school-littleton-colorado

Twenty-five years ago today, two students walked into Columbine High School with assault weapons and other firearms they obtained without background checks. They killed twelve of their fellow students and one teacher, injuring nearly two dozen others, and transforming classrooms into crime scenes. Jill and I continue to pray for the survivors and families impacted by this traumatic event, as well as a community that was forever changed. We know that pain never goes away.

Since Columbine, over 400 school shootings have exposed over 370,000 students to the horrors of gun violence. From Newtown to Parkland to Uvalde, we have seen communities across the Nation be torn apart by senseless violence. Students across the country now learn how to duck and cover before they learn how to read and write. This violence must end.

I've met with countless families who've lost loved ones because of gun violence. Their message is always the same: Do something.

My administration has answered their call. We created the first-ever White House Office of Gun Violence Prevention, overseen by Vice President Kamala Harris. I signed into law the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, the most significant gun safety legislation in decades. Last week, my administration implemented the largest expansion of the gun background check requirement since 1993, addressing the loophole that allowed the Columbine shooters to obtain guns. This action means fewer guns will end up in the hands of domestic abusers, felons, minors prohibited from purchasing firearms, and other dangerous individuals.

My administration will continue taking action, but Congress must do their part. We need universal background checks, a national "red flag" law, and we must ban assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. We need Congress to do something—do something—so that communities won't continue to suffer due to the epidemic of gun violence.