Title: Statement on the 100th Day of Captivity for Hostages in Gaza, Palestinian Territories
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/statement-the-100th-day-captivity-for-hostages-gaza-palestinian-territories

Today we mark a devastating and tragic milestone: 100 days of captivity for the more than 100 innocent people, including as many as 6 Americans, who are still held being hostage by Hamas in Gaza. For 100 days, they have existed in fear for their lives, not knowing what tomorrow will bring. For 100 days, their families have lived in agony, praying for the safe return of their loved ones. And for each of those 100 days, the hostages and their families have been at the forefront of my mind as my national security team and I have worked nonstop to try to secure their freedom.

Since Hamas brutally attacked Israel on October 7, my administration has pursued aggressive diplomacy to bring the hostages home. We saw the first results of that effort late October, when two Americans were reunited with their loved ones. In November, working in close coordination with Qatar, Egypt, and Israel, we brokered a 7-day pause in fighting that resulted in the release of 105 hostages—including a 4-year-old American child—and allowed us to surge additional vital humanitarian aid into Gaza. I was deeply engaged to secure, sustain, and extend that deal. Sadly, Hamas walked away after just 1 week. But the United States and our partners have not given up. Secretary Blinken was back in the region this past week seeking a path forward for a deal to free all those still being held. I look forward to maintaining close contact with my counterparts in Qatar, Egypt, and Israel to return all hostages home and back to their families.

I will never forget the grief and the suffering I have heard in my meetings with the families of the American hostages. No one should have to endure even 1 day of what they have gone through, much less 100. On this terrible day, I again reaffirm my pledge to all the hostages and their families: We are with you. We will never stop working to bring Americans home.