Title: Statement on the Senate Vote on Legislation To Protect Access to Contraception
URL: https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/statement-the-senate-vote-legislation-protect-access-contraception

Senate Republicans just refused to protect a woman's right to birth control. This is the second time since the Supreme Court's extreme decision to overturn Roe v. Wade that congressional Republicans have refused to safeguard this fundamental right for women in every State. It's unacceptable.

Today's vote comes 2 days before the 59th anniversary of the Supreme Court's landmark decision in Griswold v. Connecticut, which established that the fundamental right to privacy protects the ability to make deeply personal decisions free from the interference of politicians, including to access contraception. Two years ago, the Court put that right in jeopardy by overturning Roe v. Wade and taking away a woman's constitutional right to choose.

Since then, Republicans have doubled down. Republican elected officials' extreme agenda, which is at odds with the majority of Americans, continues to undermine access to reproductive health care, from abortion to contraception to in vitro fertilization. Dangerous abortion bans are forcing health care providers to close, disrupting access to critical health care services. Republican officials continue to try to restrict access to birth control and to defund Federal programs that help women access contraception.

Vice President Harris and I believe that women in every State must have the freedom to make deeply personal health care decisions, including the right to decide if and when to start or grow their family. My administration, alongside Democrats, in Congress will continue to fight to protect access to reproductive health care and keep taking action to strengthen access to affordable, high-quality contraception. And we will continue to urge Congress to restore the protections of Roe v. Wade in Federal law and safeguard the right to contraception once and for all.